Hello, and welcome back to
the Computer Forensics Path,
Course 5, digital evidence
and legal issues.
In this course,
we're going to cover
legal issues that pertain to
the admissibility
of our evidence,
whether our evidence
would be allowed
into a court of law.
We're also going to talk about
some difference between
civil law and criminal law.
Criminal law talks about
violations of a state,
local, or federal statute.
The penalties are very
high for violating those.
A person can lose their freedom.
We're also going to
talk about civil law,
which usually pertains
to cases involving
property rights and
monetary damages.
We're also going to
cover ethical issues.
Ethics is a set of values
which are going to
promote the safety and
welfare in our society.
These are things that are
taken very seriously in
our profession because if
you violate your ethics,
you will lose all credibility
in your profession,
and you also make the
profession as a whole look bad.
The first thing we're going
to talk about in Module 1 is
applicable laws and
ethics. Search authority.
This might be one of the
most important things we're
going to talk about
in this entire path.
Search authority is what gives
you the right to perform
your examination on the evidence
that you have provided to you,
or if you go out and
seize it yourself,
it's the authority under which
you're seizing that evidence.
Our search authority can
come from things like
warrants, court
orders, subpoenas,
if we have real-time
interception authority,
like in a wiretap, which
we'll talk more about.
It can come from our
state and federal laws.
If you work in the
private sector,
it could come from your employer,
company policy, or it can
also come from consent,
which we will also get
into much later on.
Search and seizure.
The general outline for all
laws governing search and
seizure come from
the Fourth Amendment
to the US Constitution.
Below on the slide you can
see that the Fourth Amendment
is written out there.
This is the right of people to be
secure in their persons,
houses, papers,
and effects against unreasonable,
and that's a very important
word, search and seizure.
This shall not be violated
without a warrant.
No warrant should be
issued except under
probable cause and that's
going to be supported by some
type of written document.
It's going to have to
describe the place
to be searched and the person
or thing to be seized.
We'll see that as we go through.
That is very important.
Again, the Fourth
Amendment, like we said,
at its most basic level,
does require a warrant.
But there are several exceptions
to the Fourth Amendment.
The ones we're going to
talk about right now,
we're going to talk
about consent.
Somebody can give you consent
to search their property.
We can also have a search
incident to a lawful arrest.
That is when somebody
is placed under
arrest by a law
enforcement officer.
There are certain
things that can be
searched as a result
of that arrest.
Plain view is an exception.
That means if you are
lawfully in a place,
you have to be there lawfully,
and you see something that
is obviously contraband,
something that's
illegal to possess,
or something that relates
to a crime you're investigating,
you can seize that and it
will be admissible
in a court of law.
Stop and frisk, this mainly
pertains to law enforcement,
is an exception to
the Fourth Amendment.
It stems from a federal case
called Terry versus Ohio,
where somebody was stopped,
and they were patted down,
and they felt an object
in their clothing,
and it ended up being a firearm.
But he matched the description of
the person that they
were looking for who
had just committed a shooting.
Automobile exception is also one.
That's because automobiles or
motor vehicles are very movable.
There is a certain
amount of exception
there because they're mobile
and you can lose the evidence.
The evidence could drive
away and you may not be
able to get it back.
There are certain parts of
an automobile that you
are allowed to search.
Exigent circumstances.
This is one that
will pertain to us
as a forensic examiner sometimes.
That's when something is
an emergency basically.
It could be you're
pinging a phone of
somebody who is threatening
to commit suicide
or maybe they took a hostage and
they're fleeing the
scene, a missing child,
you can sometimes do some type of
electronic real-time interception
without a warrant as
part of exigent circumstances
in those cases.
Banners: Banners are things
you'll see a lot of times
when you would go to
certain websites or when you
sign up for social media,
in there is something that
says you do not have
a right to privacy,
that your data and your
information can, will be shared.
Banners can also be
things that are posted.
If you walk into a prison,
you'll most often see
that all conversations
are recorded.
It can also be something
by your employer,
there may be a banner
on your page that
says that your communications
are not private.
This can also give people
the authority to monitor
real-time access stored files.
They can provide certain
information to law enforcement.
We see that with Internet
service providers lot of times.
If you're sharing elicit images,
photos of child pornography
or things you
shouldn't be sharing,
you have that stored on
your Google Drive
or your Dropbox,
then you do not have
a right to privacy.
Those things can be reported to
the police or you can
consent to these things.
A lot of times the
agreements you sign with
your Internet service provider
or Facebook, Instagram,
or any of these other
social media's platforms,
will have authorization to share
your information as part
of their company terms.
When you sign those
terms of consent,
a lot of times you're
consenting to giving
your privacy away.
We talked about the
Fourth Amendment,
a few slides back.
If we violate the
Fourth Amendment,
if we see something
illegally or in violation,
that in evidence will not
be admissible in a court of law.
If we search some place
without a warrant and we don't
have probable cause or
meet any of those exceptions
mentioned earlier,
then that would be
seizing something
illegally and it will
not be admissible.
Also, if we seize evidence
illegally and that leads
us to other evidence,
even if we seize that
new evidence legally,
because we found it based
on what we learned from the
evidence we seized illegally,
that new evidence will also be
not admissible in a court of law,
and that is called the fruits
of the poisonous tree.
If you act with malice or
irresponsibility or any type of
recklessness and you violate
any of these guidelines or laws,
you will be found in
violation and you could have
a civil case brought against you.
You could be sued civilly.
If you don't have
search authority
and you do that
examination anyway,
you could end up
getting yourself sued.
You really want to be careful
when you're looking at
your search authority,
when you're looking
at these warrants or
other legal process
that they do give you
the authority to do
the examination that
you are going to do.
Civil versus criminal: We
talked about this a little bit.
Civil cases are usually about
property crimes,
monetary damages.
They're going to
determine who's going to
be liable for this loss.
The standard of proof is a
preponderance of the evidence,
versus a criminal case,
which is something that is
punishable full by law.
This is a crime, you can
go to jail for this.
The standard of proof
here is higher,
and that is going to be proof
beyond a reasonable doubt.
The best evidence rule:
The original evidence is always
going to be your best evidence.
When the original evidence is not
available, duplicates
are admissible.
Duplicates, including
electronic recordings,
but they have to accurately
depict the original evidence.
They can't be bias or
an inaccurate representation or
an unfair representation
of the original evidence,
then they would
not be admissible.
But duplicates are admissible
when the original
is not available,
but the original is
always going to be
your best evidence.
We do have some
special situations.
I mentioned wiretaps briefly,
real-time intersection
of transmissions.
We also have stored
electronic communications.
These are communications
that are going to
be stored by maybe your
Internet service provider,
your phone service provider,
if you're using a
cellular telephone
or any other type of telephone.
We're going to also talk about
the Privacy Protection Act.
Now, the laws and rules
governing physical evidence and
electronic evidence are
generally the same.
But there are some things
we do need to keep in mind.
The computers can be used for
both legal and
illegal activities.
They can also be used
to protect information.
There are special laws
that protect electronic
communications.
We're going to talk about
those throughout this course.
The Stored Electronic
Communications Act.
Now, this act,
generally applies to your
Internet service provider.
They collect information as
course of their regular business,
as part of doing business.
This act says that they cannot
just disclose this
information to anybody.
That you do have some
right to privacy here.
Law enforcement agencies
can't just ask them.
They have to have
probable cause to get
your information from your
Internet service providers,
or any of your social media.
The provider protection.
This authorizes the
intersection and
disclosure of
information collected
as part of their
regular business.
You can't ask an Internet
service provider,
or any type of Internet
social media account,
to collect something
on a specific person,
to help you with
one of your cases.
But if this information is
collected as part of
their regular business,
they can turn it over to you,
as long as you have the
authorization to get it.
You're going to need some type of
warrant or subpoena for that.
This talks about, that the
Internet service provider,
can't turn over to
law enforcement
some information that was
obtained inadvertently.
Maybe it was something that
they don't collect
as regular business,
but they just happen to have it.
They can turn it over to
law enforcement with the
proper legal service.
If it pertains or appears to
pertain to a
commission of a crime.
Again, going back to
the example I used,
as far as somebody
puts pictures at
their Dropbox that shows
obvious child pornography,
the Internet service provider
would contact law enforcement
and let them know about it.
Or if they inadvertently
take the conversation,
voicemail message that they held,
that maybe they
usually don't hold,
as part of their business,
but it happened,
and they realized
that it does pertain
to some type of
criminal activity,
they can notify law enforcement,
and turn that particular evidence
over to law enforcement.
This talks about also
that they are required to
report child exploitation to
the National Center for Missing
and Exploited Children.
They usually do, and then that in
course will get turned
over to law enforcement.
This Privacy Protection
Act, the PPA,
this is what protects
journalists from
government officials,
who wanted to search.
This is your protected
work product.
If you write a book and that
book is on your computer,
and your computer gets seized
now you can't just take that.
That's that person's
personal property.
You may have to adjust
your search parameters
if they have
some type of protected
material on there,
and that does apply
to journalists,
and other type of
copyrighted material.
You must get some type of
legal process to obtain
any type of work product.
If you don't have that,
you will have to adjust
your search, accordingly.
The Daubert rule.
This obtains to the admissibility
of scientific evidence,
and this is going to
pertain to us in our field.
This also pertains to
qualified expert witnesses.
Talking about
scientific evidence,
you're meant to use a type of
technique that has
been used before,
that's been tested and verified
either by you or
by somebody else.
But whatever you're doing has
to be tested and verified.
Your reports and your findings
should be subject to peer review.
You should have peer review
in place where another person
will review your work to
make sure that it's correct.
There should be some type
an known rate of error.
If you're talking about DNA or
fingerprints or say hash values,
there is a known rate of error.
The method has to be one that is
acceptable in your
scientific community.
You can't use a method that
nobody has used before,
that you haven't
tested and verified,
that would not be appropriate.
Again, investigators
must be qualified
before they could testify
as an expert witness,
and that would be done in court
with the attorneys present.
Ethics. As we talked about,
they're a set of principles
that guide our behavior,
and it's very important that
we have a good code of ethics.
A lot of your organizations,
a lot of your certifying boards
have their own code of ethics,
and if you hold
the certification,
you might want to familiarize
yourself with the code of
ethics and standards for that
particular certification.
Because if you violate it,
you could lose your
certification,
and if that's part of your job,
you must have the certification
to hold your job,
you want to be very careful about
losing it due to an
ethics violation.
Again, it could lead
to civil action.
You could be sued for your
unethical actions, and again,
it just makes you look bad and it
makes the entire
profession look bad.
I talked about this.
Organizations have their own set
of guidelines and
they will differ,
so you want to be familiar
with your code of
ethics for your organization
and for any type of
certification you hold.
We have to make
decisions in situations
that are not so clear-cut,
and we're going to talk
about that more as we talk
about what we do,
imaging and collecting
of evidence.
The most important
thing to remember
here is you want to be able to
articulate what you did
and why it was necessary.
Also, poor decision-making
even outside of
your professional life can
reflect badly on you
and your employer.
Due care is very important.
When you make a decision,
make sure that you think about
all the consequences
of that decision and
use due care before you proceed.
Make sure you're working within
the scope of your
search authority,
make sure you're not changing
the original evidence,
and if you are making changes,
make sure you
document what you're
doing and why you're doing it.
Other laws that apply to
us are going to be
the Patriot Act,
and this is going to talk more
about real-time interception or
wiretapping that mainly
pertains to terrorist acts.
You do have a little more
leeway with this type of crime.
Terrorism, we can use
the Patriot Act and you can
get around some of the
warrant requirements,
which you want to make
sure that you are working
within the four
corners of the law
and that you know
what you're doing,
and you probably want to
talk to a prosecutor.
The Protect our
Children Act of 2008.
This pertains to reporting
requirements for online
crimes against children,
and I talked about
that when we talked
about the National Center
for Missing and
Exploited Children,
and how Internet service
providers are required to
report any type of child
exploitation to them.
Medical records, HIPAA is
going to come into play.
If you're talking about doing
any work for a
healthcare professional,
you want to keep
that in mind that
health records are private and
you want to familiarize
yourself with the HIPAA
law requirements.
In the next module,
we're going to talk about
preservation and consent.
We're going to talk about
preserving the evidence,
and we're going to talk about
consent searches and the
rules that govern them.